Linux is a name that broadly denotes a family of free and open-source software
operating systems (OS) built around the Linux kernel. Typically, Linux is
packaged in a form known as a Linux distribution (or distro for short) for both
desktop and server use. The defining component of a Linux distribution is the
Linux kernel,[11] an operating system kernel first released on September 17,
1991, by Linus Torvalds.[12][13][14] Many Linux distributions use the word
"Linux" in their name. The Free Software Foundation uses the name GNU/Linux to
refer to the operating system family, as well as specific distributions, to
emphasize that most Linux distributions are not just the Linux kernel, and that
they have in common not only the kernel, but also numerous utilities and
libraries, a large proportion of which are from the GNU project. This has led
to some controversy.

Linux was originally developed for personal computers based on the Intel x86
architecture, but has since been ported to more platforms than any other
operating system.[17] Because of the dominance of the Linux kernel-based
Android OS on smartphones, Linux has the largest installed base of all
general-purpose operating systems.[18] Linux is also the leading operating
system on servers and other big iron systems such as mainframe computers, and
the only OS used on TOP500 supercomputers (since November 2017, having before
gradually eliminated all competitors).[19][20] It is used by around 2.3% of
desktop computers.[21][22] The Chromebook, which runs the Linux kernel-based
Chrome OS, dominates the US K–12 education market and represents nearly 20% of
the sub-$300 notebook sales in the US.[23] Linux also runs on embedded
systems—devices whose operating system is typically built into the firmware and
is highly tailored to the system. This includes TiVo and similar DVR devices,
network routers, facility automation controls, televisions,[24][25] video game
consoles and smartwatches.[26] Many smartphones and tablet computers run
Android and other Linux derivatives.[27]
